capitol reef national park - wikipedia, the free encyclopedia capitol reef national park from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia navigation search capitol reef national park iucn national park cassidy arch location wayne garfield sevier emery utah usa nearest city torrey coordinates 38120n 111100w 38.20000n 111.16667w 38.20000; -111.16667 coordinates 38120n 111100w 38.20000n 111.16667w 38.20000; -111.16667 area 241,904 acres (377.975 sq mi; 97,895 ha; 978.95 km 2 670 acres (1.05 sq mi; 270 ha; 2.7 km 2 1 established december 18, 1971 visitors 786,514 (in 2014) 2 governing body national park service http://www.nps.gov/care/index.htm capitol reef national park united states national park utah km) long but fairly narrow. the park, established in 1971, preserves 241,904 acres (377.98 sq mi; 97,895.08 ha; 978.95 km 2 called "wayne wonderland" in the 1920s by local  boosters ephraim p. pectol buttes monoliths mi (121 km) of the long up-thrust called the  waterpocket fold thousand lake mountain lake powell 3 domes navajo sandstone united states capitol fremont river reef 4 state route 24 3 contents 1 geography 2 history 2.1 native americans and mormons 2.2 early protection efforts 2.3 administration of the monument 2.4 national park status 3 geology 4 visiting the park 5 references 6 external links geography edit capitol reef encompasses the  waterpocket fold earth's crust monocline continental plates rocky mountains eroded fossils sandstone the area was named for a line of white  domes united states capitol fremont river the fold forms a north-to-south barrier that even today has barely been breached by roads. early settlers referred to parallel, impassable ridges as "reefs", from which the park gets the second half of its name. the first paved road was constructed through the area in 1962. today,  state route 24 canyonlands national park bryce canyon national park the park is filled with canyons, cliffs, towers, domes, and arches. the fremont river has cut canyons through parts of the waterpocket fold, but most of the park is arid desert country. a scenic drive shows park visitors some of the highlights, but it runs only a few miles from the main highway. hundreds of miles of trails and unpaved roads lead the more adventurous into the equally scenic backcountry. history edit native americans and mormons edit fremont irrigated lentils squash grain basalt citation needed many years after the fremont left,  paiutes numic moki huts moki in 1872 alan h. thompson, a surveyor attached to  united states army john wesley powell clarence dutton following the  american civil war the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints salt lake city missions intermountain west loa fremont lyman bicknell torrey 3 mormons fremont river valley fruita caineville aldridge 3 lime limestone uranium by 1920 the work was hard but the life in fruita was good. no more than ten families at one time were sustained by the fertile flood plain of the fremont river and the land changed ownership over the years. the area remained isolated. 3 national park service kilns early protection efforts edit local  ephraim portman pectol booster club torrey utah state legislature 5 in 1933, pectol was elected to the presidency of the associated civics club of southern utah, successor to the wayne wonderland club. the club raised u.s. $150.00 to interest a salt lake city photographer in taking a series of promotional photographs. for several years, the photographer j.e. broaddus traveled and lectured on "wayne wonderland". 5 in 1933, pectol himself was elected to the legislature and almost immediately contacted president  franklin d. roosevelt 5 president roosevelt signed a proclamation creating capitol reef national monument on august 2, 1937. in proclamation 2246, president roosevelt set aside 37,711 acres (15,261 ha) of the capitol reef area. this comprised an area extending about two miles (3 km) north of present  state route 24 mi (16 km) south, just past capitol gorge. the  great depression 3 administration of the monument edit administration of the new monument was placed under the control of  zion national park 5 civilian conservation corps works progress administration charles kelly 5 5 during the 1950s kelly was deeply troubled by nps management acceding to demands of the  u.s. atomic energy commission uranium 5 it was not until 1958 that kelly got additional permanent help in protecting the monument and enforcing regulations; park ranger grant clark transferred from zion. the year clark arrived, fifty-six thousand visitors came to the park and 'charlie' kelly retired for the last time, full of years and experiences. 5 during the 1960s (under the program name  mission 66 3 visitation climbed dramatically after the paved, all-weather  state route 24 mi (16 km) to the south that frequently washed out. the old road has since only been open to foot traffic. in 1967, 146,598 persons visited the park. the staff was also growing. 3 during the 1960s, the nps proceeded to purchase private land parcels at fruita and pleasant creek. almost all private property passed into public ownership on a "willing buyer-willing seller" basis. 3 preservationists convinced president  lyndon b. johnson ha) were placed under nps control. by 1970, capitol reef national monument comprised 254,251 acres (102,892 ha) and sprawled southeast from  thousand lake mountain colorado river 3 national park status edit the vast enlargement of the monument and diversification of the scenic resources soon raised another issue: whether capitol reef should be a  national park monument united states congress 3 a house bill (h.r. 17152) introduced by  utah laurence j. burton ha) national park and an adjunct 48,000-acre (19,400 ha)  national recreation area grazing united states senate ha) national park alone. the bill called for a 25-year phase-out of grazing. 3 in september 1970,  united states department of interior ha) be set aside as a national park. they also recommended that the grazing phase-out period be 10 years, rather than 25. they did not favor the adjunct recreation area. 3 it was not until late 1971 that congressional action was completed. by then, the  92nd united states congress frank e. moss ha) of public lands for a capitol reef national park. in the house, utah representative  k. gunn mckay ha) and a 10-year limit for grazing phase-out. 3 s. 29 passed the senate in june and was sent to the house. the house subsequently dropped its own bill and passed the senate version with an amendment. because the senate was not in agreement with the house amendment, differences were worked out in  conference committee richard nixon 3 geology edit main article:  geology of the capitol reef area the area including the park was once the edge of an ancient shallow sea that invaded the land in the  permian cutler formation sandstone carbonate limestone kaibab limestone grand canyon during the  triassic silt siltstone moenkopi formation uplift erosion conglomerate volcanic ash uranium the members of the  glen canyon group wingate sandstone sand dunes kayenta formation navajo sandstone sahara desert the san rafael group consists of four jurassic period formations, from oldest to youngest: carmel formation gypsum sand silt graben sea water entrada sandstone barrier islands/sand bars curtis formation summerville formation streams once again laid down mud and sand in their channels, on lakebeds, and in  swampy morrison formation cretaceous cretaceous seaway only small remnants of the  mesaverde group mesas near the end of the cretaceous period, a mountain-building event called the  laramide orogeny rocky mountains monoclines colorado plateaus igneous volcanism dike sill intrusion the drainage system in the area was rearranged and steepened, causing streams to  downcut ice ages pleistocene visiting the park edit golden throne rock formation navajo sandstone carmel formation the town nearest capitol reef is  torrey, utah km) west of the visitor's center on highway 24. torrey is very small, but has several motels and restaurants. the park itself has a large campground, but it often fills by early afternoon during busy summer weekends. the  burr trail scenic backway boulder activities in the park include hiking, horseback riding, and a driving tour. mountain biking is prohibited in the park, but many trails just outside the park exist. the orchards planted by mormon pioneers are maintained by the park service and different fruit can be harvested throughout the growing season by visitors for a small fee. references edit this article incorporates public domain material national park service geology of national parks: fifth edition isbn 0-7872-5353-7 from barrier to crossroads: an administrative history of capitol reef national park, utah www.nps.gov explore america: national parks capitol reef official map and guide, the national parks: index 20012003 u.s. department of the interior 2012-03-06 2015-06-16 a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o capitol reef national park february 24, capitol reef national park web site january 17, a b c d e f g h capitol reef national park february 24, external links edit wikimedia commons has media related to  capitol reef national park wikivoyage has a travel guide for  capitol reef national park official site:  capitol reef national park capitol reef national park |utah office of tourism capitol reef country capitol reef natural history association historic american engineering record ut-77, " capital reef national park roads  photos, 4 color transparencies, 2 photo caption pages v t e national parks acadia american samoa arches badlands big bend biscayne black canyon of the gunnison bryce canyon canyonlands capitol reef carlsbad caverns channel islands congaree crater lake cuyahoga valley death valley denali dry tortugas everglades gates of the arctic glacier glacier bay grand canyon grand teton great basin great sand dunes great smoky mountains guadalupe mountains haleakal hawaii volcanoes hot springs isle royale joshua tree katmai kenai fjords kings canyon kobuk valley lake clark lassen volcanic mammoth cave mesa verde mount rainier north cascades olympic petrified forest pinnacles redwood rocky mountain saguaro sequoia shenandoah theodore roosevelt virgin islands voyageurs wind cave wrangellst. elias yellowstone yosemite zion list of national parks of the united states elevation v t e protected areas utah federal national parks arches bryce canyon canyonlands capitol reef zion nps national monuments cedar breaks dinosaur hovenweep natural bridges rainbow bridge timpanogos cave national historic site golden spike national recreation area glen canyon national historic trail mormon pioneer national forests ashley caribou-targhee dixie fishlake manti-la sal sawtooth uinta-wasatch-cache forest service areas desert biosphere reserve flaming gorge national recreation area national wildlife refuges bear river migratory bird refuge fish springs ouray national conservation areas beaver dam wash red cliffs blm national monument grand staircase-escalante u.s. wilderness areas ashdown gorge beartrap canyon beaver dam mountains black ridge canyons blackridge box-death hollow canaan mountain cedar mountain cottonwood canyon cottonwood forest cougar canyon dark canyon deep creek deep creek north deseret peak doc's pass goose creek high uintas laverkin creek lone peak mount naomi mount nebo mount olympus mount timpanogos paria canyon-vermilion cliffs pine valley mountain red butte red mountains slaughter creek taylor creek twin peaks wellsville mountain zion state state parks northern region antelope island bear lake camp floyd/stagecoach inn deer creek east canyon flight park great salt lake historic union pacific rail trail hyrum jordan river ohv park jordanelle red fleet rockport starvation steinaker utah field house of natural history utah lake wasatch mountain willard bay state parks central region fremont indian goblin valley green river huntington millsite palisade scofield territorial statehouse yuba state parks southern region anasazi coral pink sand dunes dead horse point edge of the cedars escalante petrified forest frontier homestead goosenecks gunlock kodachrome basin otter creek piute quail creek sand hollow snow canyon utah state parks and recreation v t e state utah salt lake city topics cities congressional districts counties flag geography government governors healthcare history people portal state fair symbols visitor attractions society culture crime demographics economy education politics regions cache valley colorado plateau dixie great basin great salt lake great salt lake desert mojave desert monument valley san rafael swell uinta basin uinta mountains wasatch back wasatch front wasatch range largest cities american fork bountiful cedar city clearfield cottonwood heights draper holladay kaysville layton lehi logan midvale murray ogden orem pleasant grove provo riverton roy st. george salt lake city sandy south jordan south salt lake spanish fork springville taylorsville tooele west jordan west valley city counties beaver box elder cache carbon daggett davis duchesne emery garfield grand iron juab kane millard morgan piute rich salt lake san juan sanpete sevier summit tooele uintah utah wasatch washington wayne weber attractions arches national park bonneville salt flats bryce canyon national park canyonlands national park capitol reef national park great salt lake lagoon amusement park ski areas sundance film festival temple square utah shakespeare festival zion national park https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=capitol_reef_national_park oldid=697632826 categories iucn category ii capitol reef national park civilian conservation corps in utah colorado plateau protected areas established in 1971 protected areas of wayne county, utah protected areas of garfield county, utah protected areas of sevier county, utah protected areas of emery county, utah works progress administration in utah national parks in utah 1971 establishments in utah hidden categories:  use mdy dates from october 2011 coordinates on wikidata all articles with unsourced statements articles with unsourced statements from february 2007 wikipedia articles incorporating text from the national park service commons category with page title same as on wikidata navigation menu personal tools not logged in talk contributions create account log in namespaces article talk variants views read edit view history more search navigation main page contents featured content current events random article donate to wikipedia wikipedia store interaction help about wikipedia community portal recent changes contact page tools what links here related changes upload file special pages permanent link page information wikidata item cite this page print/export create a book download as pdf printable version languages catal etina dansk deutsch franais hrvatski italiano lietuvi nederlands norsk bokml polski portugus suomi svenska trke edit links text is available under the  creative commons attribution-sharealike license terms of use privacy policy wikimedia foundation, inc. privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view 