hot springs national park - wikipedia, the free encyclopedia hot springs national park from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia navigation search hot springs national park iucn national park location garland county, arkansas usa nearest city hot springs coordinates 343049n 93313w 34.51361n 93.05361w 34.51361; -93.05361 coordinates 343049n 93313w 34.51361n 93.05361w 34.51361; -93.05361 area 5,550 acres (8.67 sq mi; 2,250 ha; 22.5 km 2 1 established april 20, 1832 (designated as national park on march 4, 1921) visitors 1,424,484 (in 2014) 2 governing body national park service website www.nps.gov/hosp hot springs national park united states national park garland county, arkansas hot springs hot springs reservation united states congress the hot spring water has been popularly believed for centuries to possess medicinal properties, and was a subject of legend among several native american tribes. following federal protection in 1832, the city developed into a successful spa town. incorporated january 10, 1851, the city has been home to major league baseball spring training, illegal gambling, speakeasies and gangsters such as al capone, horse racing at oaklawn park, the army and navy hospital, and 42nd president bill clinton. the area was made a national park on march 4, 1921. 3 us quarter america the beautiful quarters the hot springs flow from the western slope of hot springs mountain, part of the  ouachita mountain following 8,000 years of use by indigenous peoples, european americans discovered and appropriated the springs. they have used the hot spring water in therapeutic baths for more than 200 years to treat  rheumatism the park includes portions of downtown hot springs, making it one of the most accessible national parks. there are numerous hiking trails and camping areas. bathing in spring water is available in approved facilities at extra cost. the entire  bathhouse row national historic landmark north america gilded age architecture the park has become increasingly popular in recent years, and recorded over 1.5 million visitors in 2003, as well as nearly 2.5 million non-recreational visitors. contents 1 discovery and protection 2 national park 3 city of hot springs 4 bathing customs 5 pay bathhouses 6 army and navy hospital 7 disasters 8 government free baths 9 flora and fauna 10 geology 10.1 rock types 11 composition of the water 12 references 13 external links discovery and protection edit for thousands of years, this area was visited by chiefs and tribes of numerous indigenous peoples. they called it the "valley of the vapors" at the time of spanish explorer  hernando de soto caddo choctaw cherokee 4 5 quapaw arkansas river 4 in 1673  father marquette jolliet france treaty of paris 1763 louisiana purchase in december 1804  william dunbar george hunter 4 on august 24, 1818, the quapaw indians ceded the land around the hot springs to the united states in a treaty after having been forced to a reservation south of the site. 4 indian territory 22nd united states congress 5 6 hot springs reservation 4 national park edit although hot springs national park is the oldest park managed by the national park system, by act of congress in 1922, the site's name was officially changed from the hot springs reservation to the  hot springs national park 7 ha), including hot springs mountain, north mountain, west mountain, sugar-loaf mountain and whittington lake park. it later was expanded to 5,000 acres (2,000 ha). the springs are all grouped about the base of the hot springs mountain, with a flow of well over a half million gallons a day. the hot water is supplied to the various bathhouses, with resulting income from concession fees going to the u.s. treasury. the park has miles of roads and trails over the mountains. the park is open throughout the year. 8 the first bathhouses were little more than brush huts and log cabins placed over excavations cut in the rocks to receive hot water that flowed from the springs. entrepreneurs soon developed more elaborate bathing facilities, featuring wooden troughs delivering water from hillside springs to bathhouses along the east bank of hot springs creek. some of the tufa covering the hillside was excavated to accommodate the bathhouses. the narrow street along the west side of the creek was connected to the bathhouses by narrow bridges. after direct federal supervision was exercised beginning in 1877, major improvements were made. the creek was covered with stone arches, and above it a street 100 feet wide was built. all the squatters were evicted, rubbish cleaned up, and a centralized plumbing system was begun. 9 10 the park operates a public campground at gulpha gorge, about two miles (3 km) from downtown hot springs. city of hot springs edit main article:  hot springs, arkansas the city of hot springs (incorporated 1851) is governed under state and municipal law. in the 1870s, african americans in town were concentrated in happy valley, north of hot springs mountain. there were churches of various denominations, including baptist for white and black congregations. 11 the national park service exercises no control or supervision over any matters connected with the city. the city starts on the other side of central avenue from bathhouse row. its development has extended beyond the narrow valley in which the springs are located, spreading out over the open plain to the south and east. the climate is good throughout the year. the elevation of the city is 600 feet (180 m) above sea level, with surrounding hills rising another 600 feet. in the first half of the 20th century, the city operated primarily as a summer resort, but hotels have now long stayed open during the winter due to many northerly patrons coming to escape the winter cold. 8 during the peak popularity of the hot springs, until the 1950s, the many patients staying for three weeks, six weeks, or longer were a large source of business for the numerous hotels, boarding houses, doctors, and drugstores. as the daily treatments required only an hour or two, the visitors' idle time created opportunities for other businesses in the town. 11 bathing customs edit it was believed the waters benefited diseases of the skin and blood, nervous affections, rheumatism and kindred diseases, and the "various diseases of women". in the case of  tuberculosis 4 8 11 the earliest bathing procedure consisted of merely reclining in natural pools of hot springs and cool creek water for long periods of time. during the 1820s crude vapor baths stood over the springs, and bathers breathed in the vapors for extended periods of time. wooden tubs were added to some bathhouses in the 1830s. physicians began arriving in the 1850s, although many visitors did without their services; visitors remained from one week to two months. after the civil war a tub bath of 15 to 20 minutes was common. 4 during the 1870s the bathing regimen became more diverse, and physicians prescribed various types of baths for patients. the period of time for tub baths became six to ten minutes and the time in the steam bath shortened to two minutes, with only one bath a day. 4 the treatment was by drinking and bathing in the waters, producing a profuse perspiration, which was considered an active agent in fighting disease. the advice of a physician who was familiar with the use of the waters was considered necessary to avoid injury. in many cases medicine was required before using the waters, although it had been observed that the amount of drugs given was "enough to sicken a well man." 8 11 the hot baths were usually taken once a day for three weeks, when a rest was necessary (often with a week at the sulphur springs near the ouachita river). a second three weeks' course was then taken, followed again by an abstinence from bathing for several days. the usual stay at the springs was from one to three months, but many invalids stayed a year and longer. 11 the process described in 1878 was a hot bath of 90 to 95 f (32 to 35 c) for about 3 minutes (timed with a sand-glass). this was followed by another three minutes with all but the head in a steam box, or if milder treatment was prescribed, sitting atop the steam box covered with a blanket. during this the bather is also drinking hot water from their coffee-pot. after these eight to ten minutes of treatment, the bather is well rubbed down and thoroughly dried. the blanket-covered customer then would walk briskly back to their quarters to lie down for at least a half hour to let the body recover its normal temperature. sleeping at this stage was considered dangerous. 11 the bathhouses began using vapor cabinets around 1884. the bather sat in the cabinet for 1020 minutes with the lid closed tightly around the neck, with vapor from the hot water rising through the floor of the cabinet, with temperatures around 110130 f (4354 c). toward the end of the 1880s  russian turkish baths 4 although details of services were left to bathhouse operators, the park's superintendent set various rules. in the 1930s a tub bath could not take more than 20 minutes and shower no more than 90 seconds. during the next decade shower time was reduced to a minute, with maximum temperatures specified for several services. after a bath of about 98 f (37 c), the patient might spend 25 minutes in a vapor cabinet, get 15 minutes of packs (wet, hot or cold), followed by a tepid needle shower and light massage and alcohol rub. 4 by 1980 one reporter described getting a 20-minute bath, two minutes in a steam bath, 15 minutes wrapped with hot packs, and resting in a cooling room for 2030 minutes. 4 the current modern facilities are oriented toward spa style or pool services. lamar bathhouse ozark bathhouse buckstaff bathhouse quapaw bathhouse pay bathhouses edit there have been nearly two dozen pay bathhouses operating at the same time, with about nine of those within the park's "bathhouse row." (facilities have been reworked over the years, and the quapaw operate a bath incorporating two previously separate bathhouses). nine of the bathhouses were associated with hotels, hospitals, or sanatoria. the water is the same for all, but the prices charged for the baths have varied according to the equipment, accommodations and services offered by each facility. the charges for the services of the attendants are the same and include the necessities except towels, blankets, bathrobes, laundering, rubbing mercury, and handling of invalids. the area was popular with baseball players in the early 20th century, and was used by some teams for spring training. in 1929, prices for single baths ranged from $1 to $1.40, while a course of 21 baths was $16 to $24. facilities were segregated until civil rights legislation in the 1960s. baths were offered for whites at the  arlington hotel 8 at present on bathhouse row only the buckstaff and quapaw are operating as bathhouses. the fordyce is open as a visitors center; its staff gives tours of the facilities that have been historically renovated to their original appearance. the ozark is housing the museum of contemporary art; its space can be rented as reception hall. the arlington hotel, austin hotel and convention center, and the springs hotel  fordyce bathhouse maurice bathhouse hale and superior bathhouses national baptist hotel and sanitorium (bathhouse for 'colored peoples') army and navy hospital edit the army and navy general hospital (now the rehabilitation center) was also supplied with water from the springs. it is located behind the south end of bathhouse row along the base of hot springs mountain. it was administered by the war department for the benefit of military members, officers of the public health service, and honorably discharged veterans. the waters of the hot springs had an established reputation in benefiting. admission to the hospital was reserved for cases "of a serious and obstinate character, which, though resisting ordinary methods of relief, were promised a rapid and permanent recovery from the use of the waters of the spring." 8 the facility now known as the hot springs rehabilitation center was built in 1933 as the second army-navy hospital. it has been used and operated by the state for over 50 years. 12 national register of historic places disasters edit this section  does not  cite sources please help improve this section by  adding citations to reliable sources removed in november 1864 during the american civil war, a large part of the valley (the central portion of the city along hot springs creek) was burned - presumably by union troops. as in many other cities, fire has been a risk, especially before city services were developed. on march 5, 1878 a large fire burned for eight hours in the city, claiming nearly 150 buildings, including hotels, bath houses, and restaurants. on february 26, 1905, a fire started in the grand central hotel on chapel street and burned 25 blocks of the southern section of hot springs. on september 5, 1913, a laundry worker was ironing and accidentally started a fire at 424 church street, which spread rapidly due to strong winds and burned nearly 60 blocks of the south part of the city. the city has also been subject to flooding because of the narrow valley. on may 14, 1923, a severe rainstorm hit the city. with mountains surrounding three sides of the city, water flooded down the slopes of the mountains, funneling to central avenue and reaching a depth of nine feet. a lightning strike during the storm caused a fire that destroyed several commercial businesses in downtown hot springs. on february 15, 1956, a severe flood filled central avenue with three feet of rushing water, causing significant property damage. in may 1990, a series of storms dropped more than 13 inches (330 mm) of rain into the city, causing flash floods. a wave of water six feet high washed through downtown hot springs, causing extensive damage. during the flood, carpenter dam bridge was washed away. on february 27, 2014, fire broke out at the majestic hotel on park ave. just outside the boundaries of the national park caught fire. it took 75 firefighters over 22 hours to extinguish the blaze in the oldest section of the hotel, and in the end the building was a total loss. just days later, the city of hot springs had the building razed. it was believed that trespassers had started the blaze. government free baths edit congress established a free bathhouse for the indigent here on december 16, 1878. the  ral hole 4 citation needed citation needed citation needed corn hole 13 4 a new free bathhouse was built in 1904, with separate facilities for black and white patrons. the materials used in construction were of poor quality. a new bathhouse was built off the reservation in 1922. 4 8 4 flora and fauna edit the area is primarily forest. the northern slopes of the ridges and basins provide a suitable habitat for  deciduous oak hickory pines ha) of unlogged pine and oak forests on north and hot springs mountains, and 90 acres (36 ha) on sugarloaf mountain. these  old-growth forests shortleaf pine blackjack oak white oak 14 plains bison eastern elk north american cougar red wolf white tail deer turkey squirrel rabbit virginia opossum gray fox coyote skunk raccoon gopher long-tailed weasel american mink rat frog nine-banded armadillo mississippi flyway 4 geology edit the thermal springs are situated in the ouachita mountains of central arkansas. the springs emerge in a gap between hot springs mountain and west mountain in an area about 1,500 feet (460 m) long by 400 feet (120 m) wide at altitudes from 576 to 683 feet (176 to 208 m). the springs predominantly are composed of hot water from thousands of feet underground mixed with some shallow cold ground water. currently, there are 43 thermal springs in the park that are presumed to be flowing. thermal water from 33 of the thermal springs is collected and monitored at a central reservoir, which distributes the combined discharge for public use and consumption. rock types in the area include  shale chert novaculite sandstone 15 the water comes from rain which falls in mountains to the north and northeast. flowing downward through cracked rock at about one foot per year, the meteoric water migrates to estimated minimum depths of 4,500 to 7,500 ft (1,400 to 2,300 m) and achieves high temperatures in the deep section of the flow path before rising along fault and fracture conduits. under artesian pressure, the thermal waters rise and emerge through the hot springs sandstone between the traces of two thrust faults, along several northeast-trending lineaments. some rainwater from near the springs mixes with the deep hot water before discharge. the trip down takes about 4,000 years while the hot water takes about a year to reach the surface. 9 the heat comes from  the natural heating of rocks as depth increases alkaline 9 rock types edit the exposed rock types in the vicinity of the thermal springs are  sedimentary rocks mississippian ordovician igneous rocks cretaceous km) southeast of the thermal springs (potash sulphur spring and  magnet cove dikes sills ft (1.5 m) wide. there have been 80 dikes noted about 4 miles (6.4 km) southeast of hot springs, on and near the  ouachita river the sedimentary rocks in the vicinity of the thermal springs consist of shale, chert, novaculite, sandstone, and conglomerate. the stanley shale is predominantly a  clayey feldspathic silty the hot springs sandstone member of the stanley shale, hereafter referred to as the hot springs sandstone, consists of fine- to medium-grained sandstone with some shale and conglomerate. the sandstone is gray, hard and  quartzitic ft (1.8 m) the shale predominantly occurs at the top of the unit, and the principal bed of the conglomerate occurs at the bottom. the arkansas novaculite consists of lower, middle, and upper members. the lower member is a massive fractured novaculite, and is the dominant member on hot springs mountain, with a thickness of about 275 ft (84 m) the middle member is a black clay shale interbedded with novaculite, about 10 ft (3.0 m) thick on hot springs mountain. the upper member is chiefly a massive, highly calcareous light gray to black novaculite. it reaches a maximum thickness of 180 ft (55 m) in the area. the polk creek shale and missouri mountain shale overlie the bigfork chert and generally consist of shale with minor thin layers of quartzitic sandstone. the polk creek shale is a black, fissile,  graphitic argillaceous the bigfork chert overlies the womble shale and consists almost entirely of chert and silty chert in layers 2 to 12 inches (51 to 305 mm) thick, separated by minor thin beds of black shale. the chert is very brittle and intensely fractured from folding. the womble shale is the oldest geologic unit that underlies all other exposed units. it is black, hard, and argillaceous shale. 15 during most of the  paleozoic south american plate north american plate 4 anticline thrust faults ft (2,800 m) onto the southeast flank of north mountain, and  dips ft (2,700 m) roughly along the axis of the hot springs anticline, and dips about 44 degrees north. it has been proposed that a fault splits away from the southern fault, trends west and connects with the northern fault. a natural ravine trends along the location of this fault. extensive cracks, joints, and fissures in the bigfork chert, arkansas novaculite, and the hot springs sandstone allow the water to flow in the thermal springs area. 15 travertine tufa rock 4 composition of the water edit the water all comes from the same deep source, but surface appearance of the springs differed. what was called mud spring had a tepid ooze where there was no danger of being scalded. springs acquired names such as magnesia, big iron, and arsenic. big iron's water, with significant dissolved iron, would precipitate ocherous crusts and stains. 11 that substance ml) a day. the temperature averages about 143 f (62 c). maximum temperatures have declined about 5 f (2.8 c) since records have been kept. 9 in 1905 curative characteristics were being ascribed to  radium bertram boltwood radioactivity radon radium 9 drinking water is dispensed from several hot water jug fountains. the hot water is naturally  potable 16 chemical parts per million 16 bicarbonate (hco 3 130.0 silica (sio 2 53.0 calcium (ca 2+ 47.0 free carbon dioxide (co 2 9.7 sulfate (so 4 2 7.8 oxygen (o 2 4.5 magnesium (mg 2+ 4.9 chloride (cl 2.2 sodium (na 4.0 potassium (k 1.4 fluoride (f 0.26 references edit 2012-03-07 2015-06-28 2012-03-07 a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r paige, john c; laura woulliere harrison (1987).  out of the vapors: a social and architectural history of bathhouse row, hot springs national park a b hot springs ar info:  hot springs ar history  peters, richard, ed. (1866).  the public statutes at large of the united states of america 4 505. http://www.forestpreservedistrict.com/hot-springs-national-park-americas-oldest-national-park/ a b c d e f g national park service (1929).  circular of general information regarding hot springs national park, arkansas a b c d e hanor, jeffrey s.  national park service 2008-04-04 shugart, sharon (2004).  national park service 2008-03-30 a b c d e f g harper's new monthly magazine 56 national park service 2008-04-07 bake, william a. (1996).  the sierra club guides to the national parks of the east and middle west. isbn 9780679764946 mary byrd davis (23 january 2008).  a b c yeatts, daniel s. (2006).  characteristics of thermal springs and the shallow ground-water system at hot springs national park, arkansas, scientific investigations report 2006-5001 a b national park service 2008-04-04 external links edit find more about hot springs national park sister projects media travel guide official site:  hot springs national park lee standing bear moore, "the story of manataka" v t e national parks acadia american samoa arches badlands big bend biscayne black canyon of the gunnison bryce canyon canyonlands capitol reef carlsbad caverns channel islands congaree crater lake cuyahoga valley death valley denali dry tortugas everglades gates of the arctic glacier glacier bay grand canyon grand teton great basin great sand dunes great smoky mountains guadalupe mountains haleakal hawaii volcanoes hot springs isle royale joshua tree katmai kenai fjords kings canyon kobuk valley lake clark lassen volcanic mammoth cave mesa verde mount rainier north cascades olympic petrified forest pinnacles redwood rocky mountain saguaro sequoia shenandoah theodore roosevelt virgin islands voyageurs wind cave wrangellst. elias yellowstone yosemite zion list of national parks of the united states elevation v t e protected areas arkansas federal national park hot springs national historic sites fort smith little rock central high school president william jefferson clinton birthplace home national forests ouachita ozark-st. francis national memorial arkansas post national military park pea ridge national river buffalo national wildlife refuges bald knob big lake cache river felsenthal holla bend logan cave overflow pond creek wapanocca white river wilderness areas big lake black fork mountain buffalo national river caney creek dry creek east fork flatside hurricane creek leatherwood poteau mountain richland creek upper buffalo state state parks arkansas museum of natural resources arkansas post museum bull shoals-white river cane creek conway cemetery cossatot river crater of diamonds crowley's ridge daisy davidsonville historic degray lake resort delta heritage trail devil's den hampson archeological museum herman davis historic washington hobbs jacksonport jenkins' ferry lake hamilton and lake catherine lake charles lake chicot lake dardanelle lake fort smith lake frierson lake ouachita lake poinsett logoly louisiana purchase lower white river museum mammoth spring marks' mills millwood mississippi river moro bay mount magazine mount nebo ozark folk center parkin archeological petit jean pinnacle mountain plantation agriculture museum poison springs battleground powhatan historic prairie grove battlefield queen wilhelmina south arkansas arboretum toltec mounds archeological village creek state park|village creek white oak lake withrow springs woolly hollow state forest poison springs state forest wildlife management areas list https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=hot_springs_national_park oldid=695981519 categories iucn category ii ouachita mountains national parks in arkansas hot springs of arkansas protected areas of garland county, arkansas protected areas established in 1921 geology of arkansas 1921 establishments in arkansas landforms of garland county, arkansas buildings and structures in hot springs, arkansas hidden categories:  pages using duplicate arguments in template calls coordinates on wikidata articles needing additional references from october 2011 all articles needing additional references all articles with unsourced statements articles with unsourced statements from december 2008 navigation menu personal tools not logged in talk contributions create account log in namespaces article talk variants views read edit view history more search navigation main page contents featured content current events random article donate to wikipedia wikipedia store interaction help about wikipedia community portal recent changes contact page tools what links here related changes upload file special pages permanent link page information wikidata item cite this page print/export create a book download as pdf printable version languages catal dansk deutsch espaol franais hrvatski italiano nederlands norsk bokml polski portugus suomi svenska trke edit links text is available under the  creative commons attribution-sharealike license terms of use privacy policy wikimedia foundation, inc. privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view 