shenandoah national park - wikipedia, the free encyclopedia shenandoah national park from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia navigation search shenandoah national park iucn national park location virginia nearest city front royal coordinates 3832n 7821w 38.533n 78.350w 38.533; -78.350 coordinates 3832n 7821w 38.533n 78.350w 38.533; -78.350 area 199,173 acres (311.208 sq mi; 80,602 ha; 806.02 km 2 1 established december 26, 1935 visitors 1,209,883 (in 2011) 2 governing body national park service shenandoah national park blue ridge mountains u.s. state virginia national park shenandoah river valley virginia piedmont skyline drive sq mi; 32,204 ha; 322.04 km 2 wilderness national wilderness preservation system hawksbill mountain m). contents 1 geography 2 geology 3 history 3.1 creation of the park 3.2 segregation and desegregation 4 attractions 4.1 skyline drive 4.2 backcountry camping 4.3 lodging 4.3.1 campgrounds and cabins 4.3.2 lodges 4.4 waterfalls 4.5 hiking trails 4.5.1 dark hollow falls trail 4.5.2 stony man trail 5 ecology 6 ranger programs 7 see also 8 references 9 external links geography edit the park encompasses parts of eight counties. on the west side of  skyline drive warren page rockingham augusta rappahannock madison greene albemarle km) along skyline drive from near the town of  front royal waynesboro luray geology edit shenandoah national park lies along the blue ridge mountains in north-central virginia. these mountains form a distinct highland rising to elevations above 4,000 feet (1,200 m). local topographic relief between the blue ridge mountains and shenandoah valley exceeds 3,000 feet (910 m) at some locations. the crest of the range divides the shenandoah river drainage basin, part of the potomac river drainage, on the west side, from the james and rappahannock river drainage basins on the east side. 3 some of the rocks exposed in the park date to over one billion years in age, making them among the oldest in virginia.  bedrock grenville-age granitic basement billion years old) and a cover sequence of  metamorphosed neoproterozoic million years old)  sedimentary volcanic formations columns basalt 4 clastic rocks cambrian million years old).  quaternary surficial deposits 5 6 the park is located along the western part of the blue ridge  anticlinorium paleozoic appalachian fold and thrust belt folded faulted alleghanian orogeny 7 differential erosion cenozoic tectonic activity 8 9 history edit creation of the park edit shenandoah was authorized in 1926 and fully established on december 26, 1935. prior to being a park, much of the area was farmland and there are still remnants of old farms in several places. the commonwealth of virginia slowly acquired the land through  eminent domain 10 in the creation of the park [the skyline drive right-of-way was purchased from owners without condemnation], a number of families and entire communities were required to vacate portions of the  blue ridge mountains madison county page county rappahannock county nearly 90% of the inhabitants worked the land for a living. many worked in the apple orchards in the valley and in areas near the eastern slopes. the work to create the national park and skyline drive began following a terrible drought in 1930 which destroyed the crops of many families in the area who farmed in the mountainous terrain, as well as many of the apple orchards where they worked picking crops. nevertheless, it remains a fact that they were displaced, often against their will, and even for a very few who managed to stay, their communities were lost. a little-known fact is that, while some families were removed by force, a few others (who mostly had also become difficult to deal with) were allowed to stay after their properties were acquired, living in the park until nature took its course and they gradually died. the policy allowed the elderly and disabled who so wished to remain with life tenancy. the last to die was annie lee bradley shenk who died in 1979 at age 92. most of the people displaced left their homes quietly. according to the  virginia historical society 10 skyline drive a view from  skyline drive few remnants of the families that once inhabited the area that became the park have survived; this cemetery is located near  hawksbill mountain detailed map of shenandoah national park view from the top of hawksbill, the park's highest mountain segregation and desegregation edit in the early 1930s, the national park service began planning the park facilities and envisioned separate provisions for blacks and whites. at that time, in  jim crow 11 by the 1930s, there were several concessions operated by private firms within the area that would become the park, some going back to the late 19th century. these early private facilities at  skyland resort panorama resort swift run gap big meadows lodge 11 attractions edit skyline drive edit the park is best known for  skyline drive km) road that runs the entire length of the park along the ridge of the mountains. the drive is particularly popular in the fall when the leaves are changing colors. 101 miles (162 km) of the  appalachian trail km) of trails within the park. of the trails, one of the most popular is  old rag mountain horseback bicycling waterfalls national scenic byway backcountry camping edit backcountry shenandoah national park offers 196,000 acres (790 km 2 lodging edit campgrounds and cabins edit most of the  campgrounds 12 mathews arm campground big meadows campground lewis mountain campground loft mountain campground dundo group campground lodges edit there are three lodges/cabins: 13 skyland resort big meadows lewis mountain cabins lodges are located at  skyland big meadows harry f. byrd rapidan camp fishing herbert hoover rapidan river km) round-trip hike on mill prong trail, which begins on the skyline drive at milam gap (mile 52.8). the nps also offers guided van trips that leave from the byrd center at big meadows. shenandoah national park is one of the most dog-friendly in the national park system. the campgrounds all allow dogs, and dogs are allowed on almost all of the trails including the appalachian trail, if kept on leash (6 feet or shorter). 14 streams and rivers in the park are very popular with  fly fisherman brook trout 15 waterfalls edit many waterfalls are located within the park boundaries. below is a list of significant falls. 16 falls height location description overall run 93 ft (28 m) mile 21.1, parking lot just south of hogback overlook the tallest waterfall in the park. 6.5 mile (10 km) round trip hike. go before june as this waterfall tends to dry up. whiteoak canyon 86 ft (26 m) mile 42.6, whiteoak canyon parking area whiteoak canyon has a series of six waterfalls, the first (and tallest) is 86 feet (28 m). not all the falls are easily accessible from the trail. start at the lowest and work your way up to the tallest waterfall. cedar run 34 ft (10 m) mile 45.6, hawksbill gap parking area difficult 3.4 mile (5 km) round trip hike. sights along the way include waterfalls, swimming holes, and natural rock slides of varying lengths. rose river 67 ft (20 m) mile 49.4, parking at fishers gap overlook a 2.6 mile (4 km) round trip hike. can also be done as a longer loop hike. dark hollow falls 70 ft (21 m) mile 50.7, dark hollow falls parking area 1.4 mile (2 km) round trip hike. the closest waterfall to  skyline drive lewis falls 81 ft (25 m) mile 51.4, parking lot just south of big meadows, next to a service road 2 mile (3 km) round trip hike. south river falls 83 ft (25 m) mile 62.8, park at south river picnic area 3.3 mile (5 km) loop hike to an overlook above the falls. there is also a rocky, 1 mile (2 km) round trip spur trail that goes to the base of the falls. the "shortcut" is before the overlook but watch out for water snakes as they're very common in this area. doyles river falls 28 and 63 ft (9 and 19 m) mile 81.1, doyles river parking area a 3-mile (5 km) round trip hike to see both the upper and lower falls. be sure to go a little past the lower falls viewing spot for a better view. can also be turned into a 7.8 mile (13 km) loop trail that also goes by jones run falls jones run falls 42 ft (13 m) mile 84.1, jones run parking area a 3.6 mile (6 km) round trip hike. can also be turned into a longer loop hike that goes by doyles river upper and lower falls whiteoak canyon. rose river falls. south river falls. dark hollow falls. jones run falls. hiking trails edit dark hollow falls trail edit beginning at mile 50.7 of the skyline drive near the byrd visitor center, dark hollow falls trail leads downhill beside a creek called hogcamp branch to dark hollow falls, a 70-foot  cascade 17 black bear timber rattlesnake 18 17 dark hollow falls wildlife at dark hollow the stream leading to the dark hollow falls the trail leading to the dark hollow falls stony man trail edit this is one of the most scenic trails in the skyline drive. it ends up at a cliff and offers a beautiful  overlook 19 from the top of stony man cliff beginning of the trail ecology edit the climate of the park, and in turn also its flora and fauna, is largely typical for mountainous regions of the eastern  mid-atlantic prickly pear cactus hemlocks mosses oak hickory chestnut maple tulip poplar mountain laurel milkweed daisies ferns american chestnut chestnut blight oaks chestnuts gypsy moth oak oak gypsy moths oak 20 mammals include  white-tailed deer black bear bobcat raccoon skunk opossum groundhog red fox gray fox coyote eastern cottontail rabbit mountain lion 21 over 200 species of birds make their home in the park for at least part of the year. about thirty live in the park year round, including the  barred owl carolina chickadee red-tailed hawk wild turkey peregrine falcon 22 thirty-two species of fish have been documented in the park, including  brook trout longnose blacknose dace bluehead chub 23 ranger programs edit park rangers 24 see also edit national parks (united states) list of amphibians in the shenandoah national park list of national parks skyland resort big meadows hawksbill mountain humpback rock old rag mountain neighbor mountain pignut mountain knob mountain references edit 2012-03-07 2012-03-07 nvcc.edu 17 june callan bentley (14 november 2011).  mountain beltway 24 july http://www.dmme.virginia.gov/dmr3/dmrpdfs/vgfc-2009.pdf scott southworth (17 june 2015).  usgs.gov 17 june hatcher, r.d.  geological society of america abstracts with programs v. 40, p. 513 2012-01-23 wm.edu 7 may jmu.edu 7 may a b shenandoah national park vahistory.org a b engle, reed (january 1996).  2007-09-10 nps.gov 7 may visitshenandoah.com 7 may official snp pet policy national park service slone, harry (1991).  virginia trout streams-a guide to fishing the blue ridge watershed 3754.  isbn 0-88150-207-3 nicole blouin, steve; bordonaro, marilou w (1996).  waterfalls of the blue ridge isbn 0-89732-190-1 a b guide to shenandoah national park and skyline drive 2012-06-26 virginia birding and wildlife trail virginia birding and wildlife trail 2007-09-10 2007-09-01 2007-09-01 2007-09-01 nps.gov 7 may external links edit find more about shenandoah national park sister projects media travel guide official  shenandoah national park interactive virtual tours of shenandoah national park shenandoah national park when past is present: archaeology of the displaced in shenandoah national park nasa earth observatory satellite images of shenandoah national park and park's vicinity henry heatwole's guide to shenandoah national park and skyline drive united states geological survey: geologic map of the shenandoah national park region, virginia state tourism website virginia is for lovers the ground beneath our feet shenandoah pictures v t e national parks acadia american samoa arches badlands big bend biscayne black canyon of the gunnison bryce canyon canyonlands capitol reef carlsbad caverns channel islands congaree crater lake cuyahoga valley death valley denali dry tortugas everglades gates of the arctic glacier glacier bay grand canyon grand teton great basin great sand dunes great smoky mountains guadalupe mountains haleakal hawaii volcanoes hot springs isle royale joshua tree katmai kenai fjords kings canyon kobuk valley lake clark lassen volcanic mammoth cave mesa verde mount rainier north cascades olympic petrified forest pinnacles redwood rocky mountain saguaro sequoia shenandoah theodore roosevelt virgin islands voyageurs wind cave wrangellst. elias yellowstone yosemite zion list of national parks of the united states elevation v t e protected areas virginia federal national parks shenandoah national historical parks, appomattox court house nhp arlington house booker t. washington nm cedar creek and belle grove nhp claude moore colonial farm colonial nhp cumberland gap nhp george washington birthplace nm harpers ferry nhp maggie l. walker nhs national military parks, fredericksburg and spotsylvania nmp manassas nbp petersburg nb richmond nbp national cemeteries alexandria arlington balls bluff city point cold harbor culpeper danville fort harrison fredericksburg glendale hampton hampton va poplar grove quantico richmond seven pines staunton winchester yorktown national parkways blue ridge parkway george washington memorial parkway national trails appalachian trail captain john smith chesapeake nht overmountain victory nht potomac heritage trail star-spangled banner nht national back bay chincoteague eastern shore of virginia mason neck featherstone fisherman island great dismal swamp james river nansemond occoquan bay plum tree island presquile rappahannock river valley wallops island national forests george washington and jefferson usfs national recreation areas mount rogers national recreation area other nps areas assateague island national seashore chesapeake bay gateways network prince william forest park wolf trap np for the performing arts wilderness areas mountain lake wilderness ramseys draft wilderness rough mountain wilderness saint mary's wilderness national estuarine chesapeake bay state state parks bear creek lake belle isle biscuit run breaks interstate caledon chippokes plantation claytor lake douthat fairy stone false cape first landing grayson highlands high bridge trail holliday lake hungry mother james river kiptopeke lake anna leesylvania mason neck natural tunnel new river trail occoneechee pocahontas sailor's creek battlefield shot tower shenandoah river sky meadows smith mountain lake southwest virginia museum staunton river staunton river battlefield tabb monument twin lakes westmoreland wilderness road york river state forests appomattox-buckingham big woods bourassa browne channels chilton woods conway-robinson crawfords cumberland devil's backbone dragon run hawks lesesne matthews moore's creek niday place paul prince edward-gallion sandy point whitney zoar natural area antioch pines bethel beach big spring bog blackwater buffalo mountain bull run mountains bush mill stream camp branch wetlands cape charles coastal habitat the cedars the channels cherry orchard bog chestnut creek wetlands chestnut ridge chotank creek chub sandhill cleveland barrens clover hollow cowbane prairie crow's nest cumberland marsh dameron marsh deep run ponds dendron swamp difficult creek elklick woodlands false cape folly mills creek fen goshen pass grafton ponds grassy hill grayson glades hickory hollow hughlett point johnsons creek magothy bay mark's and jack's island mount joy pond mutton hunk fen naked mountain new point comfort north landing river northwest river ogdens cave parkers marsh parramore island pedlars hill pinnacle poor mountain red rock mountain savage neck dunes unthanks cave william b. trower bayshore wreck island wildlife amelia big survey briery creek chester f. phelps cavalier chickahominy clinch mountain crooked creek dick cross fairystone farms featherfin g. richard thompson game farm marsh goshen and little north mountain hardware river havens hidden valley highland hog island horsepen lake james river land's end mockhorn island pettigrew powhatan princess anne ragged island rapidan saxis stewarts creek t. m. gathright turkeycock weston white oak mountain other registered historic virginia landmarks register national register of historic places listings in virginia bridges national historic landmarks virginia department of conservation and recreation virginia department of forestry virginia department of game and inland fisheries virginia department of historic resources https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=shenandoah_national_park oldid=701695023 categories iucn category ii shenandoah national park national parks in virginia blue ridge mountains parks in augusta county, virginia parks in albemarle county, virginia parks in rockingham county, virginia parks in greene county, virginia parks in page county, virginia parks in madison county, virginia parks in rappahannock county, virginia parks in warren county, virginia 1935 establishments in virginia protected areas established in 1935 civilian conservation corps in virginia hidden categories:  coordinates on wikidata navigation menu personal tools not logged in talk contributions create account log in namespaces article talk variants views read edit view history more search navigation main page contents featured content current events random article donate to wikipedia wikipedia store interaction help about wikipedia community portal recent changes contact page tools what links here related changes upload file special pages permanent link page information wikidata item cite this page print/export create a book download as pdf printable version languages catal etina dansk deutsch franais hrvatski italiano nederlands norsk bokml polski portugus suomi svenska trke edit links text is available under the  creative commons attribution-sharealike license terms of use privacy policy wikimedia foundation, inc. privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view 