black canyon of the gunnison national park - wikipedia, the free encyclopedia black canyon of the gunnison national park from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia navigation search black canyon of the gunnison iucn national park gunnison river at the base of black canyon of the gunnison location montrose county, colorado nearest city montrose coordinates 38340n 107430w 38.56667n 107.71667w 38.56667; -107.71667 coordinates 38340n 107430w 38.56667n 107.71667w 38.56667; -107.71667 area 30,750 acres (12,440 ha) 1 established october 21, 1999 visitors 183,045 (in 2014) 2 governing body national park service black canyon of the gunnison national park united states national park colorado national park service miles (24 km) east of  montrose miles (18 km) south of  crawford km) of the 48-mile (77 km) long canyon of the gunnison river. the national park itself contains the deepest and most dramatic section of the canyon, but the canyon continues upstream into  curecanti national recreation area gunnison gorge national conservation area images of america: the black canyon of the gunnison 3 contents 1 geology 1.1 precambrian 1.2 cretaceous - tertiary 1.3 quaternary 2 history 3 biology 4 attractions 5 references 6 external links geology edit the  gunnison river m/km) through the entire  canyon north america colorado river m/km) through the grand canyon. the greatest descent of the gunnison river occurs within the park at chasm view dropping 240 feet per mile (45 m/km). 4 ft (12 m) wide at the river. 4 5 the extreme steepness and depth of the black canyon formed as the result of several geologic processes acting together. the gunnison river is primarily responsible for carving the canyon, though several other geologic events had to occur in order to form the canyon as it is seen today. 6 cliff colorado m). lighter-colored  pegmatite precambrian edit the  precambrian gneiss schist wyoming pegmatite dikes 7 cretaceous - tertiary edit the entire area underwent uplift during the  laramide orogeny tertiary volcanism west elk mountains la sal mountains henry mountains abajo mountains volcanic ash 8 the modern gunnison river set its course 15 million years ago as the run-off from the nearby la sal and west elk mountains and the  sawatch range 8 quaternary edit with the gunnison rivers course set, a broad uplift in the area 2 to 3 million years ago caused the river to cut through the softer volcanic deposits. eventually the river reached the precambrian rocks of the gunnison uplift. since the river was unable to change its course, it began scouring through the extremely hard metamorphic rocks of the gunnison uplift. the rivers flow was much larger than currently, with much higher levels of  turbidity mm) every 100 years. the extreme hardness of the metamorphic rock along with the relative quickness with which the river carved through them created the steep walls that can be seen today. 8 a number of feeder canyons running into the black canyon slope in the wrong direction for water to flow into the canyon. it is believed that less-entrenched streams in the region shifted to a more north-flowing  drainage pattern 9 history edit the  ute 3 independence spanish 10 in 1881, william jackson palmer's  denver and rio grande railroad 11 on august 13, 1882, the first passenger train passed through the black canyon. the editor of the gunnison review-press rode in one of the observation cars; he remarked that the canyon was "undoubtedly the largest and most rugged canon in the world traversed by the iron horse. we had often heard of the scenery of this canyon, but no one can have the faintest conception of its grandeur and magnificence until they have made a trip through it. it is a narrow gorge with walls of granite rising in some places to a height of thousands of feetthroughout its entire length there is probably not a quarter of a mile of straight track on it. it is a serpentine road in every respect and the curves are frequent and sharp. in hundreds of places the walls of granite are perpendicular and in many places the road bed is blasted out in the side of the walls of rock which overhang the track." he went on to proclaim, "another such a feat of railroad engineering probably can not be found in the world, and there is probably no section of colorado or of the whole country where such a varied and interesting lot of scenery can be found." 12 in the hopes of running the railroad through the rest of the black canyon, palmer sent his top engineer bryan bryant on an inner canyon exploration. bryant set off with a 12-man crew in december 1882 expecting to complete the survey in 20 days; he returned in 68. "eight of the twelve-man crew left after a few days, terrified of the task in front of them. what the rest of the men saw was spectacular and had never been seen by another human." bryant reported that the black canyon was impenetrable, and that it was impossible to build anything in its depths. 13 heeding bryant's advice, palmer decided to route the railroad south of the canyon and in march 1883, it completed its connection to  salt lake city 14 rudyard kipling 15 by 1890, an alternate route through  glenwood springs 16 in 1901, the u.s. geological survey sent abraham lincoln fellows and william torrence into the canyon to look for a site to build a diversion tunnel bringing water to the uncompahgre valley, which was suffering from water shortages due to an influx of settlers into the area. 17 18 construction on the tunnel began 4 years later, and was fraught with difficulties right from the onset. "working conditions at the tunnel were difficult due to the high levels of carbon dioxide, excessive temperatures, humidity, water, mud, shale, sand, and a fractured fault zone...it took the tunneling crew almost one year to bore through 2000 feet of water-filled rock. the tunnel was driven through granite, quartzite, gneiss, and shale as well as layers of sandstone, coal, and limestone. work on the gunnison tunnel was first done manually and by candlelight. one miner would hold the drill and rotate it while the second miner would use a sledgehammer to drive the drill into the rock. this work required strong, hard-working men. in spite of good pay and fringe benefits, most disliked the dangerous underground conditions and stayed an average of only 2 weeks." 26 men were killed during the 4 year undertaking. the tunnel was finally completed in 1909, stretching a distance of 5.8 miles and costing nearly 3 million dollars. at the time, the gunnison tunnel held the honor of being the world's longest irrigation tunnel. on september 23, president william howard taft dedicated the tunnel in montrose. 19 20 the black canyon of the gunnison was established as a  u.s. national monument national park 21 civilian conservation corps north rim road national park service national register of historic places 22 biology edit the black canyon of the gunnison national park contains a wide variety of flora and fauna. some common plants native to the park include  aspen ponderosa pine sagebrush mahogany cercocarpus utah juniper gambel oak scrub oak single-leaf ash 23 black canyon gilia aliciella penstemonoides 24 coyote elk magpie eagle mule deer great horned owl american dipper steller's jay mountain bluebird peregrine falcon white-throated swift canyon wren 25 attractions edit an estimated 250,000 tourists visit the park annually. the main attraction of the park is the scenic drive along us highway 50 and colorado highway 92, as well as the south rim. the west end of the park, where it meet blue mesa reservoir at blue mesa point, is the area most developed for camping. it includes tent camping and rv parking with full hookups as well as canyon tours, hiking, fishing and boat tours. the west end of the park has river access by automobile, as well as guided tours of the canyon. a short hike at blue mesa point information center heads down to pine creek and the morrow point boat tours, boating, fishing and hiking. at the south rim there are two  campgrounds hiking m) in length. the river can also be accessed by steep, unmaintained trails called routes or draws on the north and south rim. these routes require about two hours to hike down and two to four hours to hike back up, depending on which route is taken. all inner canyon descents are strenuous and require class 3 climbing and basic route finding skills. steep talus, impassable ledges, and lack of cover are some of the challenges hikers are faced with. poison ivy also grows abundantly in the draws and on the canyon floor. long sleeves and hiking boots are strongly recommended. the flow rate of the gunnison river should also be considered for those planning on camping in the canyon, as high river levels can wash out the camp sites. the national park service warns the following: "routes are difficult to follow, and only individuals in excellent physical condition should attempt these hikes 26 the gunnison river is designated as a gold medal water from 200 yards downstream of crystal reservoir dam to the north fork. this includes the 12 miles within the black canyon of the gunnison national park. only artificial flies and lures are permitted, and all rainbow trout are catch and release. additionally, fishing is prohibited within 200 yards downstream of crystal dam. 27 the black canyon is a center for  rock climbing traditional climbing 28 rafting opportunities exist in the region, but the run through the park itself is a difficult technical run for only the best kayakers. there are several impassable stretches of water requiring long, sometimes dangerous portages. the remaining rapids are class iii - v, and are only for expert river runners. 29 30 31 references edit 2012-03-06 2015-06-16 a b vandenbusche, duane (2009).  images of america - the black canyon of the gunnison 7.  isbn 978-0-7385-6919-2 help a b 2007-07-29 2006-10-27 2006-10-27 tweto, o (1980).  colorado geology 3746. a b c trista thornberry-ehrlich (2005).  pdf 2006-10-27 2007-07-29 2014-07-28 2014-06-24 1. help vandenbusche, duane (2009).  images of america - the black canyon of the gunnison 8.  isbn 978-0-7385-6919-2 help 2007-07-29 kipling, rudyard (1900).  from sea to sea, and other sketches isbn 978-1596058248 2014-07-29 athearn, robert (1977).  the denver and rio grande western railroad isbn 0-8032-0920-7 frank, jerritt (2003-01-01). "visions of the landscape university of montana scholarworks - theses, dissertations, professional papers line feed character in  help help vandenbusche, duane (2009).  images of america - the black canyon of the gunnison 3554.  isbn 978-0-7385-6919-2 help clark, david (1994).  uncompahgre project 69. help 2014-07-29 2007-07-29 janene caywood (2005).  accompanying photos 2007-07-29 beatty, b.l., w.f. jennings, and r.c. rawlinson (2004, february 9).  gilia penstemonoides 2007-07-29 2014-07-29 template:cite periodical 2007-07-29 2008-03-30 2008-03-30 the original 2008-03-30 external links edit find more about black canyon of the gunnison sister projects definitions media news stories quotations source texts textbooks travel guide learning resources black canyon of the gunnison national park geology and photo gallery of black canyon chicago tribune - a slash in the mesa frank erickson (19231996),  black canyon of the gunnison v t e national parks acadia american samoa arches badlands big bend biscayne black canyon of the gunnison bryce canyon canyonlands capitol reef carlsbad caverns channel islands congaree crater lake cuyahoga valley death valley denali dry tortugas everglades gates of the arctic glacier glacier bay grand canyon grand teton great basin great sand dunes great smoky mountains guadalupe mountains haleakal hawaii volcanoes hot springs isle royale joshua tree katmai kenai fjords kings canyon kobuk valley lake clark lassen volcanic mammoth cave mesa verde mount rainier north cascades olympic petrified forest pinnacles redwood rocky mountain saguaro sequoia shenandoah theodore roosevelt virgin islands voyageurs wind cave wrangellst. elias yellowstone yosemite zion list of national parks of the united states elevation v t e state colorado denver topics index coloradans elections federal lands geography government highways history timeline images law military mountains museums public defender paleontology rivers symbols transportation visitor attractions society crime culture demographics economy education politics sports regions central colorado denver-aurora-lakewood, co metropolitan statistical area eastern plains front range grand valley high plains high rockies mineral belt northern colorado northwestern colorado piedmont plateau roan plateau roaring fork valley san luis valley sangre de cristo mountains south-central colorado southwest colorado uinta mountains uintah basin western slope municipalities akron alamosa arvada aspen aurora boulder breckenridge brighton broomfield caon city castle rock centennial colorado springs commerce city cortez craig delta denver durango englewood erie evans fairplay federal heights fort collins fort morgan fountain golden glenwood springs grand junction greeley greenwood village gunnison la junta lafayette lakewood lamar leadville littleton longmont louisville loveland montrose northglenn parker platteville pueblo salida steamboat springs sterling superior thornton trinidad vail westminster wheat ridge windsor counties adams alamosa arapahoe archuleta baca bent boulder broomfield chaffee cheyenne clear creek conejos costilla crowley custer delta denver dolores douglas eagle el paso elbert fremont garfield gilpin grand gunnison hinsdale huerfano jackson jefferson kiowa kit carson la plata lake larimer las animas lincoln logan mesa mineral moffat montezuma montrose morgan otero ouray park phillips pitkin prowers pueblo rio blanco rio grande routt saguache san juan san miguel sedgwick summit teller washington weld yuma v t e protected areas state of colorado federal national parks black canyon of the gunnison great sand dunes mesa verde rocky mountain national monuments browns canyon blm usfs canyons of the ancients blm chimney rock usfs colorado dinosaur florissant fossil beds hovenweep yucca house national recreation areas arapaho usfs curecanti national historic sites bent's old fort sand creek massacre national historic trails old spanish trail oregon trail pony express trail santa fe trail national scenic trail continental divide trail national forests arapaho grand mesa gunnison pike rio grande roosevelt routt san isabel san juan uncompahgre white river national grasslands comanche pawnee national wilderness black canyon of the gunnison black ridge canyons buffalo peaks byers peak cache la poudre collegiate peaks comanche peak dominguez eagles nest flat tops fossil ridge great sand dunes greenhorn mountain gunnison gorge holy cross hunter-fryingpan indian peaks james peak la garita lizard head lost creek maroon bells-snowmass mesa verde mount evans mount massive mount sneffels mount zirkel neota never summer platte river powderhorn ptarmigan peak raggeds rawah rocky mountain national park sangre de cristo sarvis creek south san juan spanish peaks uncompahgre vasquez peak weminuche west elk national conservation areas dominguez-escalante gunnison gorge mcinnis canyons national wildlife refuges alamosa arapaho baca browns park monte vista rocky flats rocky mountain arsenal two ponds blm acecs 66 areas of critical environmental concern state colorado state parks arkansas headwaters barr lake bonny lake boyd lake castlewood canyon chatfield cherry creek cheyenne mountain crawford eldorado canyon eleven mile elkhead golden gate canyon harvey gap highline lake jackson lake james m. robb - colorado river john martin reservoir lake pueblo lathrop lone mesa lory mancos mueller navajo north sterling paonia pearl lake ridgway rifle falls rifle gap roxborough san luis spinney mountain st. vrain stagecoach state forest staunton steamboat lake sweitzer lake sylvan lake trinidad lake vega yampa river colorado natural areas aiken canyon ant hill antero-salt creek arikaree river badger wash blacks gulch blue mountain bonny prairie boston peak fen boulder mountain park boulder valley heronry brush creek fen california park castlewood canyon chalk bluffs colorado tallgrass prairie comanche grassland copeland willow carr cross mountain canyon daves draw deep creek deer gulch dinosaur ridge dome rock droney gulch duck creek dudley bluffs east lost park east sand dunes elephant rocks elk river escalante canyon escalante creek fairview fourmile creek fruita paleontological garden park fossil gateway palisade geneva basin iron fens gothic gunnison gravels haviland lake high creek fen high mesa grassland hoosier ridge hurricane canyon indian spring indian springs trace fossil irish canyon jimmy creek ken-caryl ranch kremmling cretaceous ammonite lake pasture lake san cristobal limestone ridge lookout mountain lost park lower greasewood creek mcelmo mexican cut mini-wheeler miramonte reservoir mishak lakes moosehead mountain mount callahan mount callahan saddle mount emmons iron fen mount goliath narraguinnep needle rock north park phacelia orient mine owl canyon paradise park park creek hogback park mesa pawnee woodlands pyramid rock rabbit valley rajadero canyon raven ridge redcloud peak rocky mountain woodfrog pond rough canyon roxborough running creek ryan gulch saddle mountain san miguel river sand creek shell duck creek shell rock slumgullion earthflow south beaver creek south boulder creek south cathedral bluffs specimen mountain staunton tabeguache tamarack ranch tern island treasurevault mountain trinidad k-t boundary two buttes unaweep seep uncompahgre fritillary wacker ranch west creek wheeler geologic white rocks williams creek yanks gulch/upper greasewood creek natural area zapata falls state wildlife areas 307 colorado state wildlife areas other trails american discovery trail colorado trail continental divide trail great divide trail kokopelli trail paradox trail tabeguache trail colorado department of natural resources web https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=black_canyon_of_the_gunnison_national_park oldid=700834008 categories iucn category ii canyons and gorges of colorado denver and rio grande western railroad protected areas of montrose county, colorado protected areas of gunnison county, colorado landforms of montrose county, colorado landforms of gunnison county, colorado protected areas established in 1933 1933 establishments in colorado canyons and gorges of the united states hidden categories:  pages using citations with accessdate and no url cs1 errors: invisible characters coordinates on wikidata good articles navigation menu personal tools not logged in talk contributions create account log in namespaces article talk variants views read edit view history more search navigation main page contents featured content current events random article donate to wikipedia wikipedia store interaction help about wikipedia community portal recent changes contact page tools what links here related changes upload file special pages permanent link page information wikidata item cite this page print/export create a book download as pdf printable version languages catal dansk deutsch espaol franais hrvatski italiano lietuvi nederlands norsk bokml polski portugus romn suomi svenska trke edit links text is available under the  creative commons attribution-sharealike license terms of use privacy policy wikimedia foundation, inc. privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view 