isle royale national park - wikipedia, the free encyclopedia isle royale national park from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia navigation search isle royale national park iucn wilderness area an aerial view of isle royale location keweenaw county, michigan nearest city thunder bay ontario coordinates 4860n 88330w 48.10000n 88.55000w 48.10000; -88.55000 coordinates 4860n 88330w 48.10000n 88.55000w 48.10000; -88.55000 area 571,790 acres (893.42 sq mi; 231,400 ha; 2,314.0 km 2 1 established april 3, 1940 visitors 14,560 (in 2014) 2 governing body national park service isle royale national park isle royale national park u.s. national park isle royale lake superior michigan national wilderness area international biosphere reserve km 2 km 2 u.s.-canada border lake superior national marine conservation area contents 1 geography 2 history 2.1 prehistoric 2.2 19th  3 natural history 3.1 flora 3.2 fauna 3.3 geology 4 recreation 4.1 services 4.1.1 camping 4.2 access 4.3 ships 5 see also 6 references 7 external links geography edit main article:  list of islands in isle royale national park isle royale lake superior km) in length and 9 miles (14 km) wide at its widest point. 3 400 smaller islands km) of the surrounding islands ( 16usc408g 4 history edit prehistoric edit in older times, large quantities of  copper keweenaw peninsula m) deep.  carbon-14 in  prehistoric copper mining in the lake superior region t) of copper had been mined from the region. however, david johnson and susan martin contend that their estimate was based on exaggerated and inaccurate assumptions. 5 6 19th  edit in the mid-1840s, a report by  douglass houghton geologist 7 5 the island was once the site of a resort community. the fishing industry has declined considerably, but continues at  edisen fishery lighthouses passage island rock harbor rock of ages isle royale lighthouse within the waters of isle royale national park are several shipwrecks. the areas notoriously harsh weather, dramatic underwater topography, the islands central location on historic shipping routes, and the cold, fresh water have resulted in largely intact, well preserved wrecks throughout the park. these were documented in the 1980s, with follow up occurring in 2009, by the national park service  submerged resources center natural history edit laurentian forest habitat flora edit the predominant floral habitats of isle royal are within the  laurentian mixed forest province temperate broadleaf and mixed forests biome boreal forest big woods conifer 8 conifers jack pines pinus banksiana spruces picea mariana picea glauca balsam firs abies balsamea easternred junipers juniperus virginiana deciduous quaking aspens populus tremuloides bur oaks quercus macrocarpa paper birches betula papyrifera american mountain ash sorbus americana red maples acer rubrum sugar maples acer saccharum mountain maples acer spicatum 9 10 fauna edit main article:  wolves and moose on isle royale isle royale national park is known for its  wolf moose predator-prey relationships 11 12 there are usually around 25 wolves and 1000 moose on the island, but the numbers change greatly year to year. in rare years with very hard winters, animals can travel over the frozen lake from the  canadian 13 geology edit bedrock on isle royale is basalt or sandstone and conglomerates on the 1.1 billion year old  midcontinent rift isle royale greenstone ( chlorastrolite pumpellyite upper peninsula of michigan recreation edit the greenstone ridge is a high ridge in the center of the island and carries the longest trail in the park, the  greenstone ridge trail km) from one end of the island to the other. this is generally done as a 4 or 5 day hike. a boat shuttle can carry hikers back to their starting port. in total there are 165 miles (266 km) of hiking trails. there are also canoe/kayak routes, many involving portages, along coastal bays and inland lakes. services edit the park has two developed areas: windigo minnesota rock harbor camping edit the park has 36 designated wilderness campgrounds. some campgrounds in the interior are accessible only by trail or by  canoe kayak the only amenities at the campgrounds are pit toilets, picnic tables, and fire-rings at specific areas. campfires are not permitted at most campgrounds; gas or alcohol camp stoves are recommended. drinking and cooking water must be drawn from local water sources (lake superior and inland lakes) and filtered, treated, or boiled to avoid parasites. hunting is not permitted, but fishing is, and edible berries ( blueberries thimbleberries access edit see also:  isle royale ferry service the park is accessible by ferries, floatplanes, and passenger ships during the summer months from  houghton copper harbor grand portage day-trippers because of the difficulty of travel and the hazards of wilderness survival during the winter months, isle royale national park is the only  u. s. national park winter contiguous united states 14 ships edit scheduled ferry service operates from grand portage, copper harbor and houghton. the grand portage ferries reach the island in 1 1/2 hours, and stay 4 hours at the island, allowing time for hiking, a guided hike or program by the park staff, and picnics. the  isle royale queen the  sea hunter the  ranger iii m) ship that serves park visitors from houghton, michigan to rock harbor. it is operated by the national park service, and said to be the largest piece of equipment in the national park system. it carries 125 passengers, and canoes, kayaks, and even small powerboats. it is a six-hour voyage from houghton to the park. the ship overnights at rock harbor before returning the next day, making two round trips each week, june to mid-september. briefly in the 2008 season, the ranger iii carried visitors to/from windigo. this was not continued after 4 trips, due to low interest and long crossing times. the  voyageur ii voyageur ii see also edit list of islands in isle royale national park national register of historic places listings in isle royale national park list of shipwrecks of isle royale list of fish of isle royale national park references edit 2012-03-07 2015-06-28 national park service october 13, national park service august 20, a b johnson, david (9 november 2009).  the old copper complex 17 november susan r. martin (1995). "the state of our knowledge about ancient copper mining in michigan".  the michigan archaeologist 41 ann g. harris (2004).  geology of national parks (6th ed.) 308.  isbn 0-7872-9970-7 ecological classification system 2007-09-21 gibbon, guy e.; johnson, craig m.; hobbes, elizabeth (2000).  a predictive model of precontact archaeological site location for the state of minnesota 2007-08-22 heinselman, miron (1996),  the boundary waters wilderness ecosystem 1631,  isbn 0-8166-2804-1 2011-08-22 2011-08-22 lydersen, kari.  http://www.thedailygreen.com/environmental-news/latest/national-parks-124040809 external links edit wikimedia commons has media related to  isle royale national park wikivoyage has a travel guide for  isle royale national park official  isle royale national park forest resources of isle royale national park department of agriculture v t e protected areas of michigan see also:  important bird areas of michigan national parks isle royale keweenaw historical river raisin battlefield lakeshores pictured rocks sleeping bear dunes landmarks black spruce bog natural area dead stream swamp dukes research natural area grand mere lakes haven hill state natural area newton woods porcupine mountains roscommon virgin pine stand strangmoor bog tobico marsh toumey woods warren woods state park forests hiawatha huron-manistee ottawa wildlife refuges detroit river harbor island huron kirtlands warbler wildlife management area michigan islands michigan wetland management district seney shiawassee other grand island national recreation area father marquette national memorial saint helena island national scenic area thunder bay national marine sanctuary state parks algonac aloha baraga belle isle bewabic brimley burt lake cambridge junction cheboygan clear lake coldwater lake craig lake dodge #4 duck lake fayette fisherman's island fort michilimackinac fort wilkins grand haven grand mere harrisville hart-montague trail hartwick pines hayes mill creek p.h. hoeft p.j. hoffmaster holland indian lake interlochen kal-haven trail lake gogebic lakelands trail lakeport leelanau ludington mackinac island maybury f.j. mclain mears meridian-baseline mitchell muskallonge lake muskegon negwegon newaygo north higgins lake onaway orchard beach otsego lake palms book petoskey porcupine mountains port crescent rockport sanilac petroglyphs saugatuck dunes seven lakes silver lake sleeper sleepy hollow south higgins lake sterling straits tahquamenon falls tawas point thompson's harbor traverse city twin lakes van buren van buren trail van riper warren dunes warren woods wells white pine trail wilderness william g. milliken wilson young recreation bald mountain bass river bay city brighton fort custer highland holly ionia island lake lake hudson menominee river metamora-hadley ortonville pinckney pontiac lake proud lake rifle river waterloo wetzel yankee springs forests au sable copper country escanaba river lake superior mackinaw pere marquette underwater alger de tour passage grand traverse bay keweenau manitou passage marquette sanilac shores southwest michigan straits of mackinac thumb area whitefish point other game areas agate falls scenic site allegan state game area bond falls scenic site laughing whitefish falls scenic site michigan islands wilderness area pointe mouillee state game area ralph a. macmullan conference center sturgeon point scenic site wagner falls scenic site michigan department of natural resources v t e national parks acadia american samoa arches badlands big bend biscayne black canyon of the gunnison bryce canyon canyonlands capitol reef carlsbad caverns channel islands congaree crater lake cuyahoga valley death valley denali dry tortugas everglades gates of the arctic glacier glacier bay grand canyon grand teton great basin great sand dunes great smoky mountains guadalupe mountains haleakal hawaii volcanoes hot springs isle royale joshua tree katmai kenai fjords kings canyon kobuk valley lake clark lassen volcanic mammoth cave mesa verde mount rainier north cascades olympic petrified forest pinnacles redwood rocky mountain saguaro sequoia shenandoah theodore roosevelt virgin islands voyageurs wind cave wrangellst. elias yellowstone yosemite zion list of national parks of the united states elevation authority control viaf 243181349 lccn sh85068619 https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=isle_royale_national_park oldid=701066386 categories iucn category ib isle royale national park national parks in michigan biosphere reserves of the united states wilderness areas of michigan protected areas of keweenaw county, michigan protected areas established in 1940 lake superior hidden categories:  coordinates on wikidata commons category with local link same as on wikidata wikipedia articles with viaf identifiers wikipedia articles with lccn identifiers navigation menu personal tools not logged in talk contributions create account log in namespaces article talk variants views read edit view history more search navigation main page contents featured content current events random article donate to wikipedia wikipedia store interaction help about wikipedia community portal recent changes contact page tools what links here related changes upload file special pages permanent link page information wikidata item cite this page print/export create a book download as pdf printable version languages catal dansk deutsch espaol franais hrvatski italiano lietuvi nederlands norsk bokml polski portugus simple english suomi svenska trke edit links text is available under the  creative commons attribution-sharealike license terms of use privacy policy wikimedia foundation, inc. privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view 