kobuk valley national park - wikipedia, the free encyclopedia kobuk valley national park from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia navigation search kobuk valley national park iucn meanders in the kobuk river from the air location northwest arctic borough, alaska usa nearest city fairbanks coordinates 67330n 159170w 67.55000n 159.28333w 67.55000; -159.28333 coordinates 67330n 159170w 67.55000n 159.28333w 67.55000; -159.28333 area 1,750,716 acres (708,490 ha) 1 established december 2, 1980 visitors 11,485 (in 2011) 2 governing body national park service kobuk valley national park alaska km) north of the  arctic circle united states national park alaska national interest lands conservation act caribou dog sledding sq mi; 7,084.90 km 2 state delaware arctic circle no roads lead to the park. it is reachable by foot, dogsled, snowmobile, and chartered air taxis from  nome kotzebue 2 contents 1 geography 2 ecology 3 history 4 references 5 external links geography edit the park is the center of a vast ecosystem between  selawik national wildlife refuge noatak national preserve km) by river to the  chukchi sea gates of the arctic national park and preserve km) to the east. the park includes about 81,000 acres (33,000 ha) of lands owned by native corporations and the state of alaska. 3 the park consists of the broad wetlands valley of the  kobuk river brooks range baird mountains waring mountains kiana ambler salmon river hunt river glacial drift 3 kobuk valley wilderness ha). the  selawik wilderness 4 three sets of sand dune fields are located on the south side of the kobuk river. the great kobuk sand dunes, little kobuk sand dunes and the hunt river dunes are remnants of dunefields that covered as many as 200,000 acres (81,000 ha) immediately after the retreat of pleistocene glaciation. a combination of outwash deposits from the glaciers and strong winds created the field, which is now mostly covered by forest and tundra. in present times the active dune fields cover about 20,500 acres (8,300 ha). the great kobuk sand dunes comprise the largest active arctic dune field in north america. 5 nasa 6 the park's headquarters are at the northwest arctic heritage center in  kotzebue km) west of the park on the bering sea coast. 7 8 cape krusenstern national monument noatak national preserve 9 10 11 western arctic national parklands 12 ecology edit the park lies in a transition zone between  boreal forest tundra 3 the fish and wildlife in the park are typical of arctic and subarctic fauna. the major economic species are caribou, moose, and fish species such as  salmon sheefish 3 inupiaq 13 gray wolves red foxes moose black bears brown bears beavers river otters canadian lynxes dall's sheep wolverines martens minks porcupines muskrats snowshoe hares voles 14 chinook chum pink sockeye salmon dolly varden arctic char lake trout arctic grayling burbot arctic lamprey round broad humpback pond rainbow 15 weather in the park is subject to extremes. average low temperatures in january are 8 f (22 c), and can reach nighttime lows of 50 f (46 c). summer temperatures average around 65 f (18 c), and can reach 85 f (29 c). since the park is above the arctic circle, the sun does not set from june 3 to july 9, and the sun is visible for only 1-1/2 hour on the winter solstice, with long periods of twilight on either side of sunrise and sunset. as is the case over all of northern alaska, the  aurora borealis 16 history edit human habitation in kobuk valley is believed to extend back at least 12,500 years. the present inhabitants of the valley are the  inupiat people 17 onion portage archeological district national historic landmark 13 nana regional corporation 3 the first human inhabitants of the kobuk valley were people of the  paleo-arctic tradition archaic tradition arctic small tool tradition km) downriver from onion portage. people remained in the valley until the mid-19th century, when the caribou population declined and people moved closer to the coast. these people were the akunirmiut and kuuvaum kangiamirnuit. one of their villages was located in the present park at the mouth of the hunt river. their descendents, now known as the kuuvangmiit, have mostly moved out of park lands. 3 about 32 prospectors' camps were established during a short gold rush in 18991900. surveys have not yet located them, although debris associated with the miners' boats has been found. 3 kobuk valley national park was established as one of fifteen new  national park service alaska national interest lands conservation act national monument jimmy carter antiquities act national preserve 18 19 references edit 2012-03-07 a b 2013-02-21 a b c d e f g 23 february 21 february kobuk valley national park 21 february dinwiddie; et al. (may 2010).  second international planetary dunes workshop bibcode 2010lpico1552...21d 23 may kobuk valley national park 21 february missing or empty  help cape krusenstern national monument 21 february noatak national preserve 21 february kobuk valley national park 21 february quinley, john.  kobuk valley national park 21 february a b kobuk valley national park 21 february http://www.nps.gov/kova/naturescience/upload/kova_mammals.pdf kobuk valley national park 21 february kobuk valley national park 21 february 3 21 february kobuk valley national park 21 february kobuk valley national park 21 february external links edit wikimedia commons has media related to  kobuk valley national park kobuk valley national park cultural resources of kobuk valley national park v t e national parks acadia american samoa arches badlands big bend biscayne black canyon of the gunnison bryce canyon canyonlands capitol reef carlsbad caverns channel islands congaree crater lake cuyahoga valley death valley denali dry tortugas everglades gates of the arctic glacier glacier bay grand canyon grand teton great basin great sand dunes great smoky mountains guadalupe mountains haleakal hawaii volcanoes hot springs isle royale joshua tree katmai kenai fjords kings canyon kobuk valley lake clark lassen volcanic mammoth cave mesa verde mount rainier north cascades olympic petrified forest pinnacles redwood rocky mountain saguaro sequoia shenandoah theodore roosevelt virgin islands voyageurs wind cave wrangellst. elias yellowstone yosemite zion list of national parks of the united states elevation v t e protected areas alaska federal national parks denali gates of the arctic glacier bay katmai kenai fjords kobuk valley lake clark wrangellst. elias national historical parks klondike gold rush sitka national monuments admiralty island usfs aniakchak cape krusenstern misty fiords usfs world war ii valor in the pacific national preserves bering land bridge noatak yukoncharley rivers national wildlife refuges alaska maritime alaska peninsula arctic becharof innoko izembek kanuti kenai kodiak koyukuk nowitna saint lazaria selawik tetlin togiak yukon delta yukon flats national forests chugach tongass forest service units mendenhall glacier u.s. wilderness areas aleutian islands andreafsky becharof bering sea bogoslof chamisso chuck river coronation island denali endicott river forrester island gates of the arctic glacier bay hazy islands innoko izembek karta river katmai kenai kobuk valley kootznoowoo koyukuk kuiu lake clark maurille islands misty fjords mollie beattie noatak nunivak petersburg creekduncan salt chuck pleasant/lemusurier/inian islands russell fjord saint lazaria selawik semidi simeonof south baranof south etolin south prince of wales stikine-leconte tebenkof bay togiak tracy arm-fords terror tuxedni unimak warren island west chichagof-yakobi wrangellsaint elias national conservation area steese state state parks afognak island alaska chilkat bald eagle baranof castle hill birch lake chena river area chena river site chugach deep creek denali kachemak bay totem bight wood-tikchik state forests haines southeast tanana valley alaska department of natural resources authority control viaf 245451205 gnd 7641674-4 https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=kobuk_valley_national_park oldid=701532764 categories iucn category vi kobuk valley national park hidden categories:  pages using web citations with no url coordinates on wikidata commons category with local link same as on wikidata wikipedia articles with viaf identifiers wikipedia articles with gnd identifiers navigation menu personal tools not logged in talk contributions create account log in namespaces article talk variants views read edit view history more search navigation main page contents featured content current events random article donate to wikipedia wikipedia store interaction help about wikipedia community portal recent changes contact page tools what links here related changes upload file special pages permanent link page information wikidata item cite this page print/export create a book download as pdf printable version languages catal etina dansk deutsch espaol franais hrvatski italiano lietuvi magyar nederlands norsk bokml polski portugus suomi svenska trke edit links text is available under the  creative commons attribution-sharealike license terms of use privacy policy wikimedia foundation, inc. privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view 