virgin islands national park - wikipedia, the free encyclopedia virgin islands national park from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia navigation search virgin islands national park iucn national park location united states virgin islands nearest city charlotte amalie coordinates 18200n 64440w 18.33333n 64.73333w 18.33333; -64.73333 coordinates 18200n 64440w 18.33333n 64.73333w 18.33333; -64.73333 area 14,737 acres (5,964 ha) 1 established august 2, 1956 visitors 442,414 (in 2011) 2 governing body national park service http://www.nps.gov/viis/index.htm hassel island the  virgin islands national park united states national park saint john united states virgin islands hassel island charlotte amalie saint thomas the park is famous for  scuba diving hiking trails tropical rainforest ferries from  red hook charlotte amalie cruz bay 2 contents 1 history as a park 2 attractions 3 geography 3.1 features 4 climate 5 trunk bay 6 references 7 external links history as a park edit this section is empty. you can help by  adding to it attractions edit one of the virgin islands national park's most famous attractions is trunk bay, which sports a white sand beach and an underwater snorkeling trail, although the trail's chronic overuse has led to extensive coral damage along its path. the park includes the sugar-plantation-ruins-littered  cinnamon bay bordeaux mountain m) above sea level, and whose view is best described as "what you must see from heaven". the most popular hike, however, is the reef bay trail. this route paves the way to witnessing the beauty of the surrounding forestlands, remnants of sugar mills, historical  tano petroglyph rock carvings 3 visitors can stay on saint john nearby, on off-park land, or they may elect to stay in one of the park's two campgrounds, maho bay and cinnamon bay, which offer varying levels of comfort. the park is free of hotels and resorts, with a notable exception, the  caneel bay geography edit each year, about 500,000 people visit the park. virgin islands national park is spread out on 14,737 acres (5,964 ha) of land. it became the 29th u.s. national park in 1956, when  laurance rockefeller features edit the main features of the virgin islands national park are the coral reefs and oceans. they almost completely surround the park. as new coral species replace older ones, the coral reefs are experiencing rapid change. for example, in 2006, the elkhorn and slaghorn coral were introduced to the virgin islands. another important feature of the virgin islands are the tropical forests. the tropical forests hold most of the park's plants and wildlife. the plants and wildlife are what the virgin islands park is famous for. bats are the only mammal native to the island. wild donkeys and crabs are also common species. climate edit the climate conditions at the virgin islands national park are subtropical. the average rainfall per year is 55 inches (1,400 mm). in the winter, trade winds blow from 11 to 21 knots (39 km/h). the average temperature for the park is 79 f (26 c). at the virgin islands, the dominant plant species are dry tropical forest plants. seasonality there is very little temperature difference between  summer trunk bay edit trunk bay saint john united states virgin islands cond nast traveler 4 national geographic society citation needed coral reef 4 references edit 2012-03-07 a b 2012-03-07 singer, gerald (2006).  st. john off the beaten track 4 november a b 7 march external links edit find more about virgin islands national park sister projects media travel guide nps: official  virgin islands national park nps  virgin islands national park map nps: geology of virgin islands national park the short film  saint john, virgin islands national park (1990) internet archive v t e territory united states virgin islands charlotte amalie topics bibliography demographics economy geography history telecommunications transportation visitor attractions government congressional delegates elections governors politics senators cities anna's retreat charlotte amalie charlotte amalie west christiansted cruz bay frederiksted islands saint croix saint john saint thomas water island other parks buck island reef nm christiansted nhs salt river bay national historical park and ecological preserve virgin islands coral reef nm virgin islands np v t e national register of historic places virgin islands national park historic districts annaberg historic district hassel island hermitage plantation historic district jossie gut historic district liever marches bay historic district more hill historic district reef bay sugar factory historic district nrhp properties brown bay plantation historic district catherineberg-jockumsdahl-herman farm cinnamon bay plantation dennis bay historic district lameshur plantation lind point fort mary point estate petroglyph site see also national register of historic places listings in virgin islands national park v t e national parks acadia american samoa arches badlands big bend biscayne black canyon of the gunnison bryce canyon canyonlands capitol reef carlsbad caverns channel islands congaree crater lake cuyahoga valley death valley denali dry tortugas everglades gates of the arctic glacier glacier bay grand canyon grand teton great basin great sand dunes great smoky mountains guadalupe mountains haleakal hawaii volcanoes hot springs isle royale joshua tree katmai kenai fjords kings canyon kobuk valley lake clark lassen volcanic mammoth cave mesa verde mount rainier north cascades olympic petrified forest pinnacles redwood rocky mountain saguaro sequoia shenandoah theodore roosevelt virgin islands voyageurs wind cave wrangellst. elias yellowstone yosemite zion list of national parks of the united states elevation v t e protected areas united states virgin islands national parks virgin islands national historic parks salt river bay national historic sites christiansted national monuments buck island reef virgin islands coral reef national wildlife refuges caribbean islands buck island green cay sandy point https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=virgin_islands_national_park oldid=670891324 categories iucn category ii 1956 establishments in the united states biosphere reserves of the united states parks in the united states virgin islands protected areas established in 1956 saint john, u.s. virgin islands saint thomas, u.s. virgin islands virgin islands national park hidden categories:  coordinates on wikidata articles to be expanded from august 2014 all articles to be expanded articles with empty sections from august 2014 all articles with empty sections all articles with unsourced statements articles with unsourced statements from january 2010 navigation menu personal tools not logged in talk contributions create account log in namespaces article talk variants views read edit view history more search navigation main page contents featured content current events random article donate to wikipedia wikipedia store interaction help about wikipedia community portal recent changes contact page tools what links here related changes upload file special pages permanent link page information wikidata item cite this page print/export create a book download as pdf printable version languages catal dansk deutsch espaol franais hrvatski italiano nederlands norsk bokml polski portugus suomi svenska trke ting vit edit links text is available under the  creative commons attribution-sharealike license terms of use privacy policy wikimedia foundation, inc. privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view 